README.md, before:


<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# folio <img width=120px src="man/figures/logo.png" align="right" />

<!-- badges: start -->

[![R-CMD-check](https://github.com/tesselle/folio/workflows/R-CMD-check/badge.svg)](https://github.com/tesselle/folio/actions)
[![Dependencies](https://tinyverse.netlify.com/badge/folio)](https://cran.r-project.org/package=folio)

<a href="https://tesselle.r-universe.dev" class="pkgdown-devel"><img
src="https://tesselle.r-universe.dev/badges/folio"
alt="r-universe" /></a>
<a href="https://cran.r-project.org/package=folio"
class="pkgdown-release"><img
src="http://www.r-pkg.org/badges/version/folio"
alt="CRAN Version" /></a>
<a href="https://cran.r-project.org/web/checks/check_results_folio.html"
class="pkgdown-release"><img
src="https://badges.cranchecks.info/worst/folio.svg"
alt="CRAN checks" /></a>
<a href="https://cran.r-project.org/package=folio"
class="pkgdown-release"><img
src="http://cranlogs.r-pkg.org/badges/folio" alt="CRAN Downloads" /></a>

[![Project Status: Active – The project has reached a stable, usable
state and is being actively
developed.](https://www.repostatus.org/badges/latest/active.svg)](https://www.repostatus.org/#active)

[![DOI](https://zenodo.org/badge/DOI/10.5281/zenodo.4476182.svg)](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4476182)
<!-- badges: end -->

## Overview

Datasets for teaching quantitative approaches and modeling in
archaeology and paleontology. This package provides several types of
data related to broad topics (cultural evolution, radiocarbon dating,
paleoenvironments, etc.), which can be used to illustrate statistical
methods in the classroom (multivariate data analysis, compositional data
analysis, diversity measurement, etc.).

This package is for teaching purposes only: some datasets may be
outdated.

**When using folio, you must cite the relevant publications for each
dataset (see the documentation).**

    To cite folio in publications use:

      Frerebeau, Nicolas (2022). folio: Datasets for Teaching Archaeology
      and Paleontology. R package version 1.3.0 Université Bordeaux
      Montaigne, Pessac, France. DOI 10.5281/zenodo.4476182. URL
      https://packages.tesselle.org/folio/.

    A BibTeX entry for LaTeX users is

      @Manual{,
        title = {folio: Datasets for Teaching Archaeology and Paleontology},
        author = {Nicolas Frerebeau},
        year = {2022},
        organization = {Université Bordeaux Montaigne},
        address = {Pessac, France},
        note = {R package version 1.3.0},
        url = {https://packages.tesselle.org/folio/},
        doi = {10.5281/zenodo.4476182},
      }

## Installation

You can install the released version of **folio** from
[CRAN](https://CRAN.R-project.org) with:

``` r
install.packages("folio")
```

And the development version from [GitHub](https://github.com/) with:

``` r
# install.packages("remotes")
remotes::install_github("tesselle/folio")
```

## Usage

``` r
## Arnold and Libby's Curve of Knowns
## Replicate fig. 1 from Arnold and Libby (1949)
data("arnold1949")

fit <- lm(activity_found ~ age_expected, data = arnold1949)
summary(fit)
#> 
#> Call:
#> lm(formula = activity_found ~ age_expected, data = arnold1949)
#> 
#> Residuals:
#>        1        2        3        4        5        6 
#>  0.31341 -0.27618 -0.04573 -0.19344  0.09780  0.10414 
#> 
#> Coefficients:
#>                Estimate Std. Error t value Pr(>|t|)    
#> (Intercept)  12.2665215  0.2903726   42.24 1.88e-06 ***
#> age_expected -0.0011588  0.0000938  -12.35 0.000247 ***
#> ---
#> Signif. codes:  0 '***' 0.001 '**' 0.01 '*' 0.05 '.' 0.1 ' ' 1
#> 
#> Residual standard error: 0.2421 on 4 degrees of freedom
#> Multiple R-squared:  0.9745, Adjusted R-squared:  0.9681 
#> F-statistic: 152.6 on 1 and 4 DF,  p-value: 0.0002467

plot(
  x = arnold1949$age_expected,
  y = arnold1949$activity_found,
  type = "p",
  pch = 16,
  xlab = "Historical age (years)",
  ylab = "Specific activity (C/m/g)",
  main = "Samples of known ages"
)
segments(
  x0 = arnold1949$age_expected,
  y0 = arnold1949$activity_found - arnold1949$activity_found_error,
  x1 = arnold1949$age_expected,
  y1 = arnold1949$activity_found + arnold1949$activity_found_error
)
segments(
  x0 = arnold1949$age_expected - arnold1949$age_expected_error,
  y0 = arnold1949$activity_found,
  x1 = arnold1949$age_expected + arnold1949$age_expected_error,
  y1 = arnold1949$activity_found
)
abline(fit, col = "red")
```

<img src="man/figures/README-unnamed-chunk-2-1.png" style="display: block; margin: auto;" />

## Contributing

Please note that the **folio** project is released with a [Contributor
Code of Conduct](https://www.tesselle.org/conduct.html). By contributing
to this project, you agree to abide by its terms.

Commit message:

Add related works in README

README.md, after:


<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# folio <img width=120px src="man/figures/logo.png" align="right" />

<!-- badges: start -->

[![R-CMD-check](https://github.com/tesselle/folio/workflows/R-CMD-check/badge.svg)](https://github.com/tesselle/folio/actions)
[![Dependencies](https://tinyverse.netlify.com/badge/folio)](https://cran.r-project.org/package=folio)

<a href="https://tesselle.r-universe.dev" class="pkgdown-devel"><img
src="https://tesselle.r-universe.dev/badges/folio"
alt="r-universe" /></a>
<a href="https://cran.r-project.org/package=folio"
class="pkgdown-release"><img
src="http://www.r-pkg.org/badges/version/folio"
alt="CRAN Version" /></a>
<a href="https://cran.r-project.org/web/checks/check_results_folio.html"
class="pkgdown-release"><img
src="https://badges.cranchecks.info/worst/folio.svg"
alt="CRAN checks" /></a>
<a href="https://cran.r-project.org/package=folio"
class="pkgdown-release"><img
src="http://cranlogs.r-pkg.org/badges/folio" alt="CRAN Downloads" /></a>

[![Project Status: Active – The project has reached a stable, usable
state and is being actively
developed.](https://www.repostatus.org/badges/latest/active.svg)](https://www.repostatus.org/#active)

[![DOI](https://zenodo.org/badge/DOI/10.5281/zenodo.4476182.svg)](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4476182)
<!-- badges: end -->

## Overview

Datasets for teaching quantitative approaches and modeling in
archaeology and paleontology. This package provides several types of
data related to broad topics (cultural evolution, radiocarbon dating,
paleoenvironments, etc.), which can be used to illustrate statistical
methods in the classroom (multivariate data analysis, compositional data
analysis, diversity measurement, etc.).

This package is for teaching purposes only: some datasets may be
outdated.

**When using folio, you must cite the relevant publications for each
dataset (see the documentation).**

    To cite folio in publications use:

      Frerebeau, Nicolas (2022). folio: Datasets for Teaching Archaeology
      and Paleontology. R package version 1.3.0 Université Bordeaux
      Montaigne, Pessac, France. DOI 10.5281/zenodo.4476182. URL
      https://packages.tesselle.org/folio/.

    A BibTeX entry for LaTeX users is

      @Manual{,
        title = {folio: Datasets for Teaching Archaeology and Paleontology},
        author = {Nicolas Frerebeau},
        year = {2022},
        organization = {Université Bordeaux Montaigne},
        address = {Pessac, France},
        note = {R package version 1.3.0},
        url = {https://packages.tesselle.org/folio/},
        doi = {10.5281/zenodo.4476182},
      }

## Installation

You can install the released version of **folio** from
[CRAN](https://CRAN.R-project.org) with:

``` r
install.packages("folio")
```

And the development version from [GitHub](https://github.com/) with:

``` r
# install.packages("remotes")
remotes::install_github("tesselle/folio")
```

## Usage

``` r
## Arnold and Libby's Curve of Knowns
## Replicate fig. 1 from Arnold and Libby (1949)
data("arnold1949")

fit <- lm(activity_found ~ age_expected, data = arnold1949)
summary(fit)
#> 
#> Call:
#> lm(formula = activity_found ~ age_expected, data = arnold1949)
#> 
#> Residuals:
#>        1        2        3        4        5        6 
#>  0.31341 -0.27618 -0.04573 -0.19344  0.09780  0.10414 
#> 
#> Coefficients:
#>                Estimate Std. Error t value Pr(>|t|)    
#> (Intercept)  12.2665215  0.2903726   42.24 1.88e-06 ***
#> age_expected -0.0011588  0.0000938  -12.35 0.000247 ***
#> ---
#> Signif. codes:  0 '***' 0.001 '**' 0.01 '*' 0.05 '.' 0.1 ' ' 1
#> 
#> Residual standard error: 0.2421 on 4 degrees of freedom
#> Multiple R-squared:  0.9745, Adjusted R-squared:  0.9681 
#> F-statistic: 152.6 on 1 and 4 DF,  p-value: 0.0002467

plot(
  x = arnold1949$age_expected,
  y = arnold1949$activity_found,
  type = "p",
  pch = 16,
  xlab = "Historical age (years)",
  ylab = "Specific activity (C/m/g)",
  main = "Samples of known ages"
)
segments(
  x0 = arnold1949$age_expected,
  y0 = arnold1949$activity_found - arnold1949$activity_found_error,
  x1 = arnold1949$age_expected,
  y1 = arnold1949$activity_found + arnold1949$activity_found_error
)
segments(
  x0 = arnold1949$age_expected - arnold1949$age_expected_error,
  y0 = arnold1949$activity_found,
  x1 = arnold1949$age_expected + arnold1949$age_expected_error,
  y1 = arnold1949$activity_found
)
abline(fit, col = "red")
```

<img src="man/figures/README-unnamed-chunk-2-1.png" style="display: block; margin: auto;" />

## Related Works

- [**archdata**](https://cran.r-project.org/package=archdata): includes
  archaeological data sets used in [*Quantitative Methods in Archaeology
  Using R*](https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139628730) by David L. Carlson
  (2017).
- [**historydata**](https://github.com/ropensci/historydata): includes
  data sets intended for historians learning R.

## Contributing

Please note that the **folio** project is released with a [Contributor
Code of Conduct](https://www.tesselle.org/conduct.html). By contributing
to this project, you agree to abide by its terms.
